(upbeat music)
- We're Sustainable Harvesters.
What you're standing in is about
12,000 square feet of controlled
environment greenhouse space.
In this space we can grow
up to 7,000 heads of lettuce
in every week utilizing growing techniques
called Aquaponics
and this awesome controlled
environment greenhouse
to protect us from the heat
in the Houston summers.
So we grow a bunch of different varieties
of leafy green lettuces
and we distribute that to restaurants
and other food service partners
all throughout Houston, San Antonio,
Austin, Dallas, and even in Louisiana,
including New Orleans and Baton Rouge.
So we grow about 12 different
varieties of lettuce
and we pack them into our cardboard boxes
with seven varieties in each one,
a beautiful blend of reds and greens,
crunchy and tender.
From butter head lettuce, to oak leaf,
to lolla rossa, and even
green and red romaine
to really bump our
differentiating product line
where chefs and other
food service partners
can get a product that
they've never seen before
and a product that has quality
and consistency like no other.
So we seed all of our lettuce by hand
and we start them on these
grow trays right here.
So this grow tray has 162 spots
of a one and one inch cube
that we ultimately put one seed in
and let them germinate in the dark
for about two days.
After that time period they
have access to the sunlight.
They're gonna grow their first leaf
and specifically with lettuce that
first leaf is called a radical.
So once they hit that radical stage,
we bring them into the sunlight
and we ultimately leave them under
LED lights for about two to three weeks.
When they get to about this size
or a little bit younger
or a little bit older,
we actually bring these trays down
to the very back of the greenhouse
where each one of these will pop out
on a bed of pegs exposing
its cubed material.
This cube material is
made of 99% peat moss
with 1% elastic polymer
giving it a sponge-like effect,
allowing us to submerge
this root structure
into water for the life of the product.
So when we put these products in the water
we ultimately have to
remove product first.
So the first stage in
every day is harvesting.
We try to harvest in the
earlier morning time period
because the lettuce does tend to wilt
in the summertime during the 11 to
4 or 5 o'clock period of time.
So we're limited to the
morning hours to harvest.
When we do harvest in the morning,
it's as easy as pulling this entire board
out of the water
and carefully bringing it
to our food preparation area
where we'll ultimately take each one
of these heads of
lettuce off of this board
by pulling them out,
exposing just a few of the bad leaves
that might be there.
We'll ultimately compost those leaves,
leaving this head of lettuce with
its roots still in tact.
When we put these roots around this,
it gives a shelf life of close to
three weeks in your refrigerator.
Now that's a really big value for
our farmer's market patrons that
might take it home
and not wanna eat it that first week
and have that access to it the next week.
For our restaurant partners,
it's not as important,
but it still allows that product
to be the freshest
product in their kitchen
because it is still living.
Now when we remove these boards,
it leaves a space in these grow beds.
These are 100 foot grow beds
and we stack these every single day.
Our entire process is very
similar to blockchain.
When one thing goes out,
one thing will go in at a different
area of the system.
So when we remove these boards,
we ultimately have to seed appropriately
because it's a time frame.
So those seeds won't be in the water
for another two weeks
so we really have to plan on
having that product in there
and think forward about two
to six weeks at all time.
Now when we remove the boards,
we leave a gap up in the front
and then that allows us to push all
the boards towards us
here, our harvest area,
and stack new boards in the back
utilizing our germination cubes.
So it's as easy as pushing these back
with just one hand
and if you can think of the reverse
we'd be pushing these forward
so that we can ultimately
harvest this lettuce
closer to our clean area
so it really eliminates a lot of
the cross contamination effects.
We wear gloves, we wear aprons
and hair nets or hats
so that there is a very limited chance
for any kind of cross
contamination in our system.
Now when there is an
opening spot in the back,
we'll ultimately have
to restock these plants
and it's as easy as pulling
these little cubes out,
all 162 of them,
and simply putting them directly into
these raft boards that are made perfectly
for those one inch by one inch cubes.
Now when we put those in,
we'll fully stock this.
This happens every single day
so that we're always keeping
this grow bed covered.
If we were to leave an open
spot for more than a day,
the nutrients in this water would
really ignite algae
and it would just grow
like the lettuce would.
It really grows in full force.
It's a beautiful algae,
I wish we could utilize it for something,
but in our system it's not beneficial.
It takes away from the nutrients
that all the plants are trying to eat.
So a little bit more about our process
of harvesting and ultimately packing
before we get into the
science side of Aquaponics.
So when we move these rafts
over to our clean area
and we ultimately clean
all of that lettuce,
wrap the roots,
we have to pack it and put
it in our cooler right away
to crisp it up.
So we'll pack it in these trays
that we call our transfer trays.
Ultimately packing one variety
in each one of these trays,
giving us the ability to
pack all seven varieties
with a couple of these
and keep them in our cooler to crisp up.
Then it's time to pack our lettuce
and make our mixed cases.
So it'll be as easy as
doing one variety at a time,
laying out all boxes,
and just putting the red
all in the ten boxes,
then the green and then the red
and so that really keeps the lettuce
from being out in the heat for
an extended period of time.
Everything will be fresh and crisp
in our 36 degree cooler space
until it's ready to be packed.
When they are packed,
we'll leave them on the other side
of the cooler stacked up
and we can fit about 150 boxes in there
and every other day almost,
Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays,
we have distribution companies come
to our roll up door, pick up the product,
and ultimately distribute it out
to our restaurant partners that
might be a little bit
further from our reach.
We do still keep a loyal
small customer base
of delivery routes that we personally do,
but we limit those to a lot of the
restaurants in a very small area,
but we do try and distribute out
and promote as many
restaurants that we work with
with the distribution partners as we can.
So that's really the process
of moving from seed to
harvest in our system
and up next I think we're gonna really
dive into the Aquaponics side
and what makes this product grow so well
in this system
and ultimately the greenhouse that
allows us to grow year round,
creating a consistent product
and ultimately a great customer base.
So now it's really time to
get into the Aquaponics side
and what makes us different than
most traditional growers out there.
So the way that we grow all this fresh,
leafy green lettuce is a combination
between two ecosystems in a growing
technique called Aquaponics.
So the basic definition of Aquaponics
is the combination between aquaculture,
raising fish, our freshwater fish,
in a controlled environment
and hydroponics which is growing plants
in a soil-less environment.
So we utilize both
ecosystems working together
to simultaneously create the nutrients
and ultimately remove the nutrients
in the form of up taking
and growing their beautiful
leafy green leaves.
So starting first with
the fresh water fish,
specifically we use Blue Nile Tilapia
and these tilapia come to us all male
from a great breeder in New Mexico
called Americulture.
We get them all male for three
really important reasons.
First they create more waste as a male
versus a female to create
nutrients in our system.
Second they grow much quicker as a male
versus a female.
And third and most importantly,
they don't reproduce.
If they were to reproduce,
we would be having tons and tons
of small little spawn
get through the filters
that we have at the bottom of these tanks,
ultimately get into our filtration
over on the rock media,
and if they were lucky enough,
maybe even swim into our grow beds
and become really, really
hungry vegetarians.
They would eat all of our roots
until the point that we really
wouldn't have a product.
Now there are some types of fish
that are beneficial in grow beds,
but we really try and separate
these two components the best we can.
So these tilapia are the
real engine to our motor.
They create that nutrient in
its raw form called ammonia
and they create that my
excreting a waste product
after we feed them every
day two to three times.
So I'm about to feed these guys
and they're probably pretty hungry
here in the summertime.
In the winter they kinda slow down,
but in the summer they are full force,
ready and hungry
and creating that lean meat that
we really like to create
with these tilapia.
So we'll feed them real quick
and see if they're actually excited here.
So as these tilapia eat that waste product
and ultimately create that waste product,
it gets brought down by gravity
to the base of these fish tanks.
These tanks are equipped
with a conical base
and that conical base can really help
trap a lot of that solids
and move it to a lower point in the system
which is our next
filtration, our biofilters.
These are a simple baffle system
that separates out the solids
from the liquid ammonia,
or broken apart ammonia.
We can remove almost 50% of all the
fish waste in those two tanks
and we flush that out once a week
to our compost beds,
adding a really rich nutrient igniter
in that compost bin.
So after it removes its 50%,
that other 50% of that waste
heads down to our second filter
we like to call our living filter.
This is an ebb and flow, flood and drain,
rock media bed
that raises that water to a certain level
and then drains it out quickly
creating aeration and
ultimately slowing down
the momentum of those
solid waste particles
so that they can be consumed by
naturally occurring
bacteria in the system.
Not only do we have
naturally occurring bacteria
helping us out creating that nutrient,
every one of these beds is equipped
with about four pounds of
these red wiggler worms.
These red wiggler worms are a great
little rumba in these media beds.
They clean out any of the bigger particles
that we might have
ultimately that might get clogged
in the smaller pipes in our system.
They also excrete a supplemental
nutrient to the system,
ultimately balancing out
these grow beds right here
so that the water passing
below this walkway
into our grow beds is
clean of any solid debris
and just really rich in ammonia
and hopefully really high in nitrates
which the plants can ultimately take up
in the form of that nitrate
and remove it from the system
before that water flows directly back
to the lowest point in our system
where we equipped a pump sending it
eight feet directly above so that
we can have fresh water going directly
to those fish tanks
creating a closed look, re-circulatory,
aquaculture system by the
scientific definition.
So Aquaponics really allows you to
grow almost any type of vegetable
or fruit that you really want to.
You just have to adapt your system
to accommodate for those
certain types of crops.
Here we have deep water culture
which allows us to really
grow a fast moving crop
that doesn't need to stay
in these beds for too long.
It also limits your growing abilities
in that deep water culture
to crops that might not
be a rooting vegetable
or have a really dense amount of roots.
So things like carrots,
beets, or radishes,
or even tomatoes that have to be vined up
and are really a long lasting crop
would be better suited in those media beds
that we just left on the
other side of the greenhouse.
Now no matter what you're growing
or what type of environment
you really have or system,
you really have to control the weather.
In this environment in Houston,
we're really hot and humid.
It gets up into the 105, 110 degrees
with almost 100% humidity.
So growing these products outdoors
is really only limited to the springtime
and early or late winter.
So having this greenhouse environment
allows us to really trap
the heat in the winter
and really cool this
place down in the summer
utilizing a couple different components
throughout the greenhouse.
Now all of these components are really
dictated through an
environmental control box
set with parameters as that
temperature raises or lowers,
it will turn certain things on
in accordance to that temperature gauge
so that we're not really always
having full force AC coming through here
or we're blowing through our heaters.
So all of those temperature readings
are situated through a sensor hanging
throughout the greenhouse
and a weather mass outdoors
in front of the front door.
So those will come into that control box
and ultimately turn on the
various components that we have.
Now first we'll talk about the winter.
A little bit easier to
grow here in Houston.
In the winter time we really don't have to
warm this place up too much.
The only real concern is
getting the temperature
in the water too cold for the tilapia.
If they get below 55 degrees,
they're really prone and really
open to disease and death.
So we create an ambient
temperature in here
that's a little bit
higher than its threshold
and we utilize these 200,000 BTU heaters
to turn on propane we engage
so that we can only turn those on,
raise that temperature
just to that threshold,
and then they'll turn off
so that we're not wasting a lot of propane
or a lot of electricity doing that.
So now getting into the
harder part of the year,
our summertime is really hot here
and so we really have
to control the weather
to grow throughout the year all 12 months.
And the way we do that is
a couple various components
that create a wind tunnel
through this greenhouse.
So on the other side of the greenhouse,
we have exhaust fans.
We have nine, four foot
by four foot exhaust fans
that will turn on in the
morning of a hot day.
One by one as those turn on,
a vent on the other
side of that brown wall
gradually gets larger and larger.
So now we're sucking that air from outside
through the greenhouse
and out the top of the other side
creating almost a wind tunnel that
moves that humidity up
and out of the greenhouse.
Now on a really hot day,
we're really just sucking
hot air in from outside.
So we have to add one
more layer to this system
to really cool it down to the threshold
that this lettuce can really thrive in
and the way we do that
is drenching that entire
brown wall from top to bottom reservoir
and circulating that over and over again
until all of those cooling
pads are drenched with water.
Now that vent on the
other side is still open
and those exhaust fans are
still pulling that air,
but now it comes in contact with
a very thin stream of water,
ultimately evaporating that water
and cooling this temperature
in the greenhouse
down to about 90 degrees,
which is our upwards threshold
in the hottest days of the summertime.
This allows us to really
grow the lettuce year round,
but we are still limited in the summertime
to harvesting and planting
to more early or late hours of the day.
Some greenhouses will
incorporate shade cloth
and that really is dependent on
the crop variety that you have.
We have ultimately decided not to
utilize shade cloth because this lettuce
really needs as much sunlight as possible
and through a lot of
years of trial and error,
we've just found out
that with our environment
and our product and our system,
shade cloth is not appropriate
for what we're doing here.
So that's really how we cool
and heat this place up to
grow a product year round
creating some consistency in the market
and really boosting our credibility
to the chefs and the patrons
at our farmer's markets
throughout Texas and Louisiana.
So not only is this system sustainable,
but it's really efficient on labor.
We've incorporated a very simple way
of harvesting, seeding, and planting
so that you can really minimize
the expense of labor
and really maximize your profits.
This entire greenhouse can be run
with 7,000 heads of lettuce per week
with just two people operating it.
So one efficiency here is planting
and so these cubes that
we talked about earlier
come in one inch by one inch square
coconut core and elastic polymer cubes.
Now these guys are perfectly sized
to be put and placed into our grow boards.
So by putting it on a bed of pegs,
I can ultimately pop
all of these cubes out
and very simply grab them,
maybe six at a time,
two by two if you're not so skilled,
and start plugging away.
So we'll start planting these
and we go by variety
and we can really do about
four and a half trays
or grow boards and rafts per cube tray.
And so we'll do about
four or five per cube tray
and we really try and
time how much we harvest
to how many seeds we
have ready to go as well.
So usually we'll have
excess seeds ready to go
so that if something bad happens
or if we harvest a lot of one variety,
let's say butter head
goes in really popular
for the Easter holiday
or for any kind of different holiday
at our farmer's market,
we might have gone through
a lot more of that,
we can ultimately have some back up
so that we're ready to put them
into our system when they need to.
So when we put our first tray in
we always date and label that
with the variety of lettuce
and ultimately the date that
we're putting it in here.
We also have the date
that we germinated it
and this all goes back
into those Google forms
so that we can really track production
and see how many weeks it's taking us
to get a head of lettuce
from the back of the grow bed
all the way to the front of the grow bed.
So as I mentioned earlier,
it's as easy as stacking them in the back
and pushing them forward
to place this lettuce
where its appropriate spot is.
So we'll push those all the way forward,
keep stacking these until this
entire grow bed is full
and so that we have a
nice blanket of insulation
to keep that cool temperature in the water
and limit the amount of
algae growth in this system.
We do have a difference
between aqua and hydro
and so aqua utilizes fresh water fish
as our nutrient base.
Hydroponic, like we have these
tomatoes growing right here,
is actually solely chemical based
or you add your soluble nutrients
and ultimately distribute
them the same way
that you would do in Aquaponics,
but it doesn't fully get recirculated
and so you ultimately have to
keep adding those nutrients
once every two weeks or so
and keep draining that body of water
to replenish those nutrients
so it's not as sustainable.
It's very difficult to
get organic for that
and it is a very efficient
and future way of doing
it, much like this,
but we ultimately like to utilize
the sustainability features of Aquaponics.
LANDiO, LAND is OPPORTUNITY.
(upbeat music)